The ability to visualize the consequences of the actions under consideration is crucial to becoming an expert programmer, just as it is in any synthetic, creative activity.


So it is with programming, where we are planning the course of action to be taken by a process and where we control the process by means of a program. To become experts, we must learn to visualize the processes generated by various types of procedures.


Looking at linear-recursion-iteration file: 

We find 2 approaches to get to the same result Recursive vs Iteration

The first process, substitution/recursive model reveals an expansion
of the operations. Expansion occurs as the process builds up a chain
of deferred operations. Then contraction starts happening as
the operations are actually performed.
Recursive Process

Carrying out this process requires interpreter keep track of operations to be performed later.

The second process does not grow and shrink. At each step, all we need to keep track of, for any n, are the current values of the variables product, counter, and max-count. We call this an iterative process. In general, an iterative process is one whose state can be summarized by a fixed number of state variables, together with a fixed rule that describes how the state variables should be updated as the process moves from state to state and an (optional) end test that specifies conditions under which the process should terminate.

IMPORTANT: On big contrast between the two processes is that the
iterative case, the program variables provide a complete description of the state of the process at any point.

Not so with the recursive. There is hidden information that needs to be maintained in the interpreter to give context to how many operations are left and the chain that follows


The previous examples illustrate that processes can differ considerably in the rates at which they consume computational resources. One convenient way to describe this difference is to use the notion of order of growth to obtain a gross measure of the resources required by a process as the inputs become larger.